

Algebra of text without formulas / Habr


              8  June   at 18:38  Algebra of text without formulas Search engines *Semantics *Algorithms *Natural Language Processing * 
        Translation
         
                Original author:
                
                  Sergey Pshenichnikov
                  The article is an abstract of my book [1] based on previously presented publications [2], [3], [4], [5].1. Coordinating texts1.1. Rules1.1.1. Texts and algebraNumbers and letters are two kinds of ideal objects-signs for studying relations of real objects. Understanding (interpretation) of texts is personified - it depends on a person's genotype and phenotype. Also, the meaning of words can change over time. All words of contextual language are homonyms. A word has as many properties (relationships between words) as there are contexts in the entire corpus of natural language.People understand numbers in roughly the same way and regardless of where and when they are used. The language of numbers is universal, universal, and eternal.Algebra (a symbolic generalization of arithmetic) and text (a sequence of symbols) are so far two very different tools of cognition.1.1.2. CoordinationApplication of mathematical methods in any subject area is preceded by coordinatization, which begins with digitization. Coordinatization is the replacement, modeling of the object of research by its digital copy. This is followed by the correct replacement of the model numbers themselves with symbols and the determination of the properties and regularities of combinations of these symbols. If correct coordinatization is applied to the text, the text can be reduced to algebra. For successful algebraization, it is extremely important to describe the coordinatization rules and the properties of the coordinating objects in such a way as to reduce the variability of their choices. 1.1.3. Purpose of AlgebraizationThe goal of text algebraization is to be able to compute from solutions of systems of algebraic equations the meaning of text, variants of structuring, vocabularies, summaries and versions of text by the target function.Texts are understood as sequences of signs (letters, words, notes, etc.). There are five types of sign systems: natural, figurative, linguistic, records, and codes. 1.1.3. Purpose of AlgebraizationThe carrier of a character sequence is all its characters without repetition. A carrier may be called an alphabet or a dictionary of a sign sequence. Words are sequences of letters or elementary phonemes. The meaning of a letter is only in its form or sound. There is no contextual dependence of the letters of the alphabet. Ultimate context dependence is present in the words of homonyms of the natural language. For example, the Russian word "kosa" has four different meanings.  It is believed that a fifth of the vocabulary of the English language is occupied by homonymy.1.1.5. RepetitionText is a character sequence with at least one repetition. Vocabulary is an iconic sequence without repetition. The presence of repetitions allows one to reduce the number of used sign-words (reduce the vocabulary). But then the repeated signs can differ in meaning. The meaning of a word depends on the words around it. Problems of understanding words and text have as their cause that this some part of meaning (meaning) is determined or guessed subjectively and ambiguously. Different readers and listeners understand different meanings for the same word.When words are repeated in a text, there are preferable, in the opinion of the author of the text, connections-relationships of the repeated word with other words. These relationships are recorded as the new meaning of the repeated word. 1.1.6. Semantic markupIf a particular text does not have explicit repetitions, it does not mean that they are not hidden in semantic (contextual) form. The meaning can be repeated, not only the character-sign (word) denoting it. The context here is a fragment of text between repeating words. If the contexts of different words are similar, then different words are similar in the sense of their common contexts, the word-signs of those contexts. Contexts are similar if they have at least one common sign-word.The context is not only for two words repeated in a row. The meaning or context of a word can be pointed to by referring to any suitable fragment of text, not necessarily located in the immediate vicinity of the repeated word.  In this case, the text loses its linear order, like making words out of letters. If there are no such fragments, the meaning of the word is borrowed by reference to a suitable context from another corpus text (library). Common words in contexts, in turn, also have their contexts - the notion of a refined word context arises. 1.1.7. Coordination rulesIn a finite character sequence, each character has a unique number that determines the place of the character in the sequence. No two characters can be in the same place. But the text requires another index to indicate the repetition of a sign in the text. This second index creates equivalence relations on a finite set of words. It is reasonable to match the sign with some two-index object (for example, some matrix). The first index of the matrix indicates the number of the sign in the sequence. The second index indicates the number of this sign, first encountered in the sequence. The carrier (dictionary) of a character sequence (text) is its part of characters with the same indices. Missing word numbers in the dictionary can be eliminated by continuous numbering. Text coordinating rules:The first index of the coordinating text (matrix) is the ordinal number of the word in the text, the second index is the ordinal number of the same word first encountered in the text. If the word has not been previously encountered, the second index is equal to the first index.       The dictionary is the original text with deleted repetitions. It is possible to order the dictionary with exclusion of gaps in word numbering.                                                          For two or more texts that are not a single text, the word order in each text is independent. In two texts, the initial words are equally first. Just as in two books, the beginning pages begin with one.                                          The common dictionary of a set of texts is the dictionary of all texts after their concatenation. It is possible to order the dictionary with deletion of gaps in the numbering of words.                1.2. Examples 1.2.1. Similarity and sameness  According to G. Frege any object having relations with other objects and their combinations has as many properties (meanings) as these relations of similarity and sameness (tolerance and equivalence). The part of the values taken into account is called the sense by which the object is represented in a given situation. The naming of an object by a number, a symbol, a word, a picture, a sound, a gesture to describe it briefly is called the sign of the object (this is one of the meanings). Each of the all possible parts (boolean set) of an object's meanings (meaning) corresponds to one sign.  This is the main problem of meaning recognition, but it is also the basis for making do with minimal sets of signs. It is impossible to assign a unique sign to each subset of values. The objects of information exchange are minimal sets of signs (notes, alphabet, language dictionary). The meaning of signs is usually not calculated, but is determined by the contexts (neighborhoods) of the sign so far intuitively. 1.2.2. Example on the abacusA solution to the problem of sign ambiguity is the semantic markup of text. The semantic markup can be explained on the example of marginal unambiguity. On Russian abacus the text is a sequence of identical signs (knuckles). The vocabulary of such a text consists of a single word. This is even stronger than in Morse code, where the dictionary consists of two words. Without semantic markup, it is impossible to use such texts. Therefore, the vocabulary changes and the characters are divided into groups - ones, tens, hundreds, etc. These group names (numbers) become unique word numbers. The vocabulary are numbers from zero to nine. Each knuckle, too, can be represented so far by an undefined matrix on such a Cartesian abacus. The transformation of identical objects into similar ones has taken place. The measure of similarity is the coordinate values of the words. In addition to positional, repetitions of dictionary digits occur when arithmetic operations are performed. Equivalence relations are established: if after an arithmetic operation the number 9+1 is obtained, then 0 appears in that position and 1 is added to the next digit. On the abacus, all the knuckles are shifted to the original (zero) position, and one is added in the next digit (wire). Some matrix transformation is performed on the matrix abacus.If one sets a measure of the sameness of signs, then the ratio of tolerance (similarity) can be transformed again into the ratio of equivalence (sameness) by this measure. For example, by rounding numbers. One can recognize the difference between tolerance and equivalence by the violation of transitivity. For tolerance relations it can be violated. For example, let an element A be similar to B in one sense. If the sense of B does not coincide with the sense of element C, then A can be similar to C only in the part of intersection of their senses (part of properties). The transitivity of relations is restored (closed), but only for this common part of sense. After the sameness is achieved, A will be equivalent to C. For example, the above transformation (closure) on some coordinates provides arithmetic operations on a matrix abacus. 1.2.3. Chess exampleFor chess, the vocabulary of their matrix text of the game is the numbers of one of the pieces of each color and the move separator (from 1 to 11). The word of the chess text is also a kind of matrix. The first coordinate i is unique and is the cell number on the chessboard (from 1 to 64). The second coordinate j is a number from the dictionary. The chess matrix text at any moment of the game is the sum of matrices, each showing a piece on the corresponding place on the chessboard. The repetitions in the text appear both because of duplication of pieces and because of constant transitions during the game from similarity to sameness and vice versa for all pieces except the king. The game consists in implementing the most effective such transitions and the actual classification of the pieces. Pawns that are identical in the beginning then become similar only by the move rule, and sometimes a pawn becomes identical with a queen. The tool of matrix text analysis is a transitivity control to check the difference between similarity and sameness. Lack of transitivity control is an algebraic explication of misunderstanding for language texts, loss in chess, or errors in numerical calculations. Relational transitivity is a condition for transforming a set of objects into a mathematical category. The semantic markup of a text can become the computation of its categories by means of transitive closure. The category objects are the contexts of matrix words, the morphisms are the transformation matrices of these contexts.1.2.4. Example of a language textExample text:A set is an object that is a set of objects. A polynomial is a set of monomial objects which are a set of objects-somnomials. Text in normal form is coordinated according to the above rules. The vocabulary of a text is the text itself, but without repetitions. Text coordination is its indexing and matching of indexed matrix words.1.2.5. Example of a mathematical textAs an example of a mathematical text selected formulas for the volume of the cone, cylinder and torus. The formulas are treated as texts. This means that signs included in texts are not mathematical objects and there are no algebraic operations for them. For the semiotic analysis of formulas as texts, the repetition of signs is important. The repetitions determine the patterns. Formulas are presented according to the rules of coordinating in index form in a single numbering, as if they were not three texts, but one. The coordinated text is written through matrices in tabular form.1.2.6. Example of a Morse-Weil-Herke code  This example is chosen because of the extreme brevity of the dictionary. In Morse code, the character sequences of 26 Latin letters can be considered as texts consisting of words - dots and dashes. The order of words (dots and dashes) is extremely important in each individual text (alphabet letter). In linguistic texts, the order is also important ("mom's dad" is not "dad's mom", but there are exceptions ("languid evening" and "languid evening").The dictionary and carrier of Morse code is a sequence of two character-characters -- ("dot" and "dash") that coincides with the letter A. The order of the characters in the dictionary or the carrier is no longer important. Therefore, the carrier may also be the letter N. One letter is the carrier (dictionary), the remaining 25 letters are code texts. Defining the 26 letters of Morse code as texts of words is unusual for linguistic texts. In linguistic texts, words are composed of letters. But for codes, as relations of signs, the composition of letters (cipher) from words is natural. Each code word (of dots and dashes), as some object, has two coordinates. The first coordinate is the number of the word in this letter (from one to four). The second coordinate is the number in the dictionary (1 or 2). The dictionary is the same for all 26 texts. All the 26 texts (Latin letters) are independent of each other: the presence of dots or dashes in one text (as letters) and their order have no effect on the composition of the other text (another letter). Therefore the numbering of the first character in Morse code in all letters begins with one according to the third coordinate rule.Each point or dash, of which a letter consists, taking into account their order, according to the coordinating rule, is assigned a coordinating object - a matrix, the choice of which must satisfy certain requirements.1.3. Requirements for coordinate objectsCoordination for texts consists in matching the words of the text with some "number-like objects" that satisfy three general requirements:The objects must be individual like numbers; The objects must be abstract (the volume of the concept is maximal, the content of the concept is minimal); Algebraic operations (addition, multiplication, comparison) can be performed over the objects.The text-appropriate objects in algebra are two-index matrix units:They are individual-all matrix units are different as matrices. An arbitrary n-order matrix can be represented through a decomposition by matrix units. Matrix units are the basis of a complete matrix algebra and a matrix ring. This means that the maximum concept volume requirement is satisfied. Matrix units contain only one unit - the content is minimal.All algebraic operations necessary for the coordinate object can be performed with matrices.2. Matrix units In the section on the basis of matrix units (hyperbinary numbers) the necessary algebraic systems for transformation of coordinated texts into matrix ones are constructed and investigated. The matrix representation of texts allows to recognize and create the meaning of texts by means of mathematical methods.2.1. DefinitionMatrix units are matrices in which the unit is at the intersection of the row number (first index) and the column number (second index). In the following, only square matrix units are considered.The number of all square matrix units (full set) is equal to the total number of elements of a square matrix.Hereinafter matrix units are considered as a matrix generalization of integers 0 and 1. The main difference between such hyperbinary numbers and integers is the noncommutativity of their product.2.2. Product 2.2.1. Îïðåäåëÿþùåå ñîîòíîøåíèåThe product of matrix units is different from zero (zero matrix) only if the internal indices of the product matrices are equal. Then the product is a matrix unit with the first index of the first factor and the second index of the second factor. Some matrix units can be called simple matrix units by analogy with simple integers, and others can be called composite matrix units because they are products of simple ones. A complete set of matrix units can be obtained from simple matrix units, which are called the formants of the complete set. Matrix units are treated precisely as a matrix generalization of integers. Left and right noncommutative divisors of hyperbinary numbers can be different, and there are divisors of zero when each multiplier (the divisor of the product) is different from zero, but their product is equal to a zero matrix. This property of matrices essentially distinguishes them from integers, for which there are no divisors of zero. But many concepts of modular arithmetic (comparisons of integers modulo) remain valid for hyperbinary numbers, but only because of their matrix form. The elements of such matrices (zero and one) have no such properties.  Simple matrix units (analog of simple integers) in the full set are recognized by the ratio of indices.2.2.2. Indexes The indices of simple matrix units are of two kinds: the units in such binary matrices are immediately above or below the main diagonal of the square matrix. The elements with the same indices (diagonal matrix units) are located on the main diagonal, and they are not simple.In composite matrix units, the difference of the first and second indices is either zero (diagonal matrix units), or the difference of the indices is greater than one in absolute value. In composite matrix units their units are outside the two diagonals where the units of simple matrix units are located. The indices of composite matrix units are all pairs of indices of elements of a square matrix of dimension n except for pairs of indices of simple matrix units.The ratio of indices determines the value of the product of two identical matrix units. Unlike integers, the square of any hyperbinary number is either zero (nilpotent numbers) or the same number (idempotent hyperbinary numbers).2.2.3. Idempotent and nilpotentIdempotency is a property of an algebraic operation and an object, when repeatedly applied to an object, to produce the same result as the first application of the operation. For example, it is the addition of a number to zero, multiplication by one, or raising to the power of one.Diagonal matrix units are idempotent. Squares of diagonal matrix units are matrices themselves due to equality of internal indices. The product of diagonal matrix units with different indices is zero. Such algebraic objects are known as orthogonal projectors. A nilpotent element is an element of algebraic structure, some degree of which turns to zero. All matrix units (hyperbinary numbers) except for idempotent ones are nilpotent matrix units. Their second degree is converted to zero. A pair of identical nilpotent matrix units (hyperbinary numbers) are divisors of zero.The ratio (distribution) of prime and composite hyperbinary numbers in the full set is determined by their dimension n (the corresponding dimension of matrix units).2.2.4. DistributionThe distribution of prime and composite matrix units is as follows. The number of matrix units with elements above and below the main diagonal is simple out of the total number of complete matrix units. The remaining matrix units are composite matrix units (products of simple ones).    The peculiarity of the system of hyperbinary numbers is that they have left and right multipliers (phantom), multiplication by which does not lead to their change.2.2.5. Phantomness Phantom units are such multipliers of matrix units that when multiplied do not lead to a change in the matrix units. Phantom is a generalization of unipotency. Matrix units have a countable set (an infinite set that can be numbered by a natural number series) of phantom left and right factors. The phantom multipliers do not lead to a change in the matrix unit and are analogous to the unit for integersIn contrast to the case of integers and their dull multiplication by one, the phantom multipliers of matrix units are countably manifold. If the occurrence of a particular phantom multiplier has signs of a pattern, then matrix units can be compared by their phantom multipliers. Phantom multipliers are some free index (coordinate) parameters of hyperbinary numbers. The motivation for using phantom multipliers is that the relations between matrix units can be extended by corresponding equivalence and similarity relations between their phantom multipliers. Different matrix units with the same or similar phantom multipliers can be compared modulo this phantom multiplier. Conversely, identical matrix units may differ by their phantom multipliers. If a one-to-one correspondence between a matrix unit and its phantom multiplier is defined, then this multiplier can be the module of comparison of matrix units.The presence of such phantom multipliers will further be used to compare words by their contexts and to compose systems of matrix text equations. Contexts for words will be their corresponding phantom multipliers.One-valuedness of decomposition of integers into prime factors (factoriality) for matrix units is generalized taking into account their noncommutativity and the need to restrict the ambiguity of decompositions.   2.2.6. Hyperbinary factorialityMatrix units have a countable set of decompositions into factorizers. This means that there is no single-valuedness of factorization for matrix units. This property will prove useful for comparisons of text fragments at any distance from each other. Among the decompositions of matrix units it is possible to define some canonical decompositions generalizing the decompositions of integers into prime factors. Such decompositions are algebraically richer than decompositions of integers due to noncommutativity of hyperbinary numbers.  There is the following classification of canonical expansions.2.2.7. ClassificationThere are three classes of canonical decompositions of matrix units. A decomposition is called canonical if the co-multipliers are simple matrix units. The property determining the canonical decompositions is the maximal closeness in coordinates of the multipliers of the decomposition of composite hyperbinary numbers into prime numbers. In general case there are three classes of canonical expansions of arbitrary matrix units depending on the ratio of indices:2.2.7.1. The first index is greater than the second.This is the first class of decomposition into prime matrix units - here the first index is greater than the second one strictly by one in each factor. It is impossible to be less than that.2.2.7.2. The first index is less than the second.This is the second class of decomposition into prime matrix units - the first index is less than the second in each factor. The first index is strictly less than the second index by one in each factor.2.2.7.3. The indices are equalThis is the third class of decomposition into simple matrix units - the first index in the first factor is less than the second one strictly by one, and in the second factor the first index is greater than the second one by one and equal to the second index of the first factor. The decomposition is singular and therefore it is canonical.All simple matrix units are the complete system of formants of the complete set of matrix units.2.2.8. FormatorsA comparatively small number of simple matrix units will allow to write any texts only with the help of such formants which are formants for all matrix units (complete set). The formants are the alphabet of matrix texts, and monomials, as products of formants, are the words.A complete system of formants consists of simple matrix units. Compound matrix units (monomials) are called basis units of a complete set in systems of hypercomplex numbers, e.g. alternions.These formants, like basis elements, are linearly independent. There is no set of any numbers other than zero such that any partial sum or sum of all elements and basis elements equals the zero matrix. This follows from the fact that the units in all matrix units of any formant and basis element are in different places in the matrix and it is impossible to achieve a zero matrix sum by using numbers (integers or real numbers) as coefficients before the summands. The multiplicity of integers for hyperbinary numbers is inherited in terms of similarity.2.2.9 Similarity on the leftMatrix units having the same second indexes are multiples (similar) from the left. 2.2.10. Similarity on the rightMatrix units having the same first indexes are multiples from the right. The transitivity of multiplicity for triples of integers is inherited for triples of hyperbinary numbers.                                            2.2.11. Left similarity transitivity The similarity relations of matrix units are transitive: if the first matrix unit is similar to the second matrix unit on the left and the second matrix unit is similar to the third matrix unit, then the first matrix unit is similar to the third matrix unit on the left. 2.2.12. Transitivity of similarity to the right If the first matrix unit is similar to the right of the second matrix unit and the second matrix unit is similar to the third matrix unit, then the first matrix unit is similar to the right of the third matrix unit. The similarity relations on the right are transitive.The transitivity property of similarity of matrix units will be used further in the construction of the category of context.2.3. Addition2.3.1. ProblemThe result of matrix unit multiplication is a matrix unit. Matrix units are closed with respect to the multiplication operation. Therefore the algebraic system of matrix units by multiplication is a monoid of matrix units or a semigroup with a unit matrix (a common neutral element). The result of adding matrix units will no longer be a matrix unit in the general case. Matrix units are matrix monomials (monomials). They are either simple matrix units or their products. A matrix polynomial (polynomial) is the sum of matrix monomials. Any n