

Context category / Habr


              23  April  2021 at 13:01  Context category Search engines *Semantics *Algorithms *Natural Language Processing * 
        Translation
         
                Original author:
                
                  Ñåðãåé Ïøåíè÷íèêîâ
                  Similarity and samenessThe mathematical model of signed sequences with repetitions (texts) is a multiset. The multiset was defined by D. Knuth in 1969 and later studied in detail by A. B. Petrovsky [1]. The universal property of a multiset is the existence of identical elements. The limiting case of a multiset with unit multiplicities of elements is a set. A set with unit multiplicities corresponding to a multiset is called its generating set or domain. A set with zero multiplicity is an empty set.The problem is determining whether the elements are the same. The similarity depends on the properties of these elements that are taken into account. Cucumbers and watermelons are similar in color externally, but it is difficult to call them the same in gastronomic use, although the botanical description is largely the same.According to G. Frege, any object that has relations with other objects and their combinations has as many properties (values) as these relations. The part of the values taken into account is called the meaning that the object is represented in this situation. The name of an object by a number, symbol, word, picture, sound, gesture for its short description is called an object sign (this is one of the values).All possible parts of the object’s values (meaning) correspond to a single sign. This is the main problem of recognizing meaning, but at the same time the basis for making do with minimal sets of characters. It is not possible to assign a unique sign to each subset of values. The objects of information exchange are the minimum sets of characters (notes, alphabet, language dictionary). The meaning of signs is usually not calculated, but determined by the sign contexts (neighborhoods) intuitively.The solution to the problem of ambiguity of signs is the semantic markup of the text. The semantic markup can be explained by the example of extreme unambiguity. On Russian accounts, the text is a sequence of identical characters (knuckles). According to [2], the dictionary of such a text consists of one word. It is impossible to use such texts without semantic markup. Therefore, the dictionary changes, and the characters are divided into groups – units, tens, hundreds, etc. These group names (numbers) are unique word numbers. The dictionary D is the numbers from 0 to nine. Each knuckle is represented by a matrix unit on such a Cartesian abacus. For example, the number 2021 on a matrix abacus is represented by the sum of four matrix units:where the subscripts are the Cartesian coordinates of the matrix word (numbers in this case). There was a transformation of identical objects into similar ones. The measure of similarity is the values of the coordinates of the words. In addition to positional numbers, repetitions of numbers from the dictionary occur when performing arithmetic operations. Equivalence relations are established:If, after an arithmetic operation, the number 9 + 1, is obtained, then 0 appears in this position, and 1 is added to the next digit. On the abacus, all the knuckles are shifted to their original (zero) position, and one is added to the next digit (wire). On the matrix abacus, the transformation is performed:If you set a measure of the similarity of signs, then the tolerance (similarity) ratio can again be turned into an equivalence (sameness) ratio for this measure. For example, by rounding numbers. The difference between tolerance and equivalence can be recognized by the violation of transitivity. For a relationship of tolerance, it can be violated. For example, let the element A be similar to B in one sense. If the meaning of B does not coincide with the meaning of the element C, then A can be similar to C only in terms of the intersection of their meanings (part of the properties). The transitivity of the relationship is restored (closed), but only for this general part of the meaning. After the sameness achieved by specifying the meaning, A will be equivalent to C. For example, the above transformation (closure) on some coordinates ensures the execution of arithmetic operations on the matrix abacus.Another example of the contextual dependence of signs is chess. It is even stronger in double chess [3]. In this modification of chess, it is allowed to make a finite number of double moves during the game at any given time. The game remains consistent. The rest of the rules are the same as in normal chess, with the exception of two: the first move is a single move and castling is allowed during the check. The author of the game in the case when all the moves are double is prof. Zaitsev G. A.For chess, the dictionary of their matrix text is the numbers of one of the pieces of each color and the move separator (from 1 to 11). A word in a chess text is a matrix unit. The first coordinate of it is unique and is the number of the cell on the chessboard (from 1 to 64). The second coordinate of the word is from the dictionary. The chess matrix text at any point in the game is the sum of the matrix units, each of which shows a piece at the corresponding place on the chessboard.Repetitions in the text appear both because of the duplication of figures, and because of the constant transitions during the game from similarity to sameness and vice versa for all figures except the king. The game consists in the implementation of the most effective such transitions and the actual classification of shapes. Pawns that are the same at first then become similar only by the rule of the move, and sometimes the pawn becomes the same as the queen.A tool for analyzing matrix texts is the transitivity control to check the difference between similarity and sameness. The lack of transitivity control is an algebraic explication of a misunderstanding for language texts, a loss in chess, or errors in numerical calculations.Transitivity of relations is a condition for turning a set of objects into a mathematical category. The semantic markup of the text can be the calculation of its categories by means of transitive closure. The objects of the category are the contexts of matrix words [2], morphisms are the transformation matrices of these contexts.ContextThe context of the word Ek,j  of the matrix text [2] is its fragment Fji,k  – he sum of matrix units (words) between two matrix words-repetitions Ei,j and Ek,j:where the index D R means that any index from the right dictionary D R of the matrix text [2] can stand in this place, including the characters of the text-forming fragments. The context is all the words of the matrix text between the repeated characters of the dictionary D R . For example, between repeated words, repeated dots, signs of paragraphs, chapters, volumes of language texts or phrases, periods, and parts of musical works.The signs of text-forming fragments look the same, but they are also homonymous signs-their context is fragments (1). The context of a language fragment (explication or explanation) can be not only a language text, but also a sound (for example, music), figurative (photo) or joint (video). The context of a musical text can be a language text (for example, a libretto).Matrix words correspond to their matrix contexts, represented as algebraic objects (1). All possible relations between these objects are the subject of analysis when determining the meaning of words. For the study of such constructions, category theory is useful because it is based on the concept of transitivity.Context categoryLet F1j , ..., Fnj  – these are all contexts Fji,k words Ej,j 