

Converting text into algebra / Habr


              28  March  2021 at 19:09  Converting text into algebra Search engines *Semantics *Algorithms *Natural Language Processing * 
        Translation
         
                Original author:
                
                  Ñåðãåé Ïøåíè÷íèêîâ, Àíòîí Âàëüêîâ
                  By Ph.D. Sergey Pshenichnikov, Ph.D. Anton ValkovAlgebra and language (writing) are two different learning tools. When they are combined, we can expect new methods of machine understanding to emerge. To determine the meaning (to understand) is to calculate how the part relates to the whole. Modern search algorithms already perform the task of meaning recognition, and Google’s tensor processors perform matrix multiplications (convolutions) necessary in an algebraic approach. At the same time, semantic analysis mainly uses statistical methods. Using statistics in algebra, for instance, when looking for signs of numbers divisibility, would simply be strange. Algebraic apparatus is also useful for interpreting the calculations results when recognizing the meaning of a text.Text is defined as a sign sequence of arbitrary nature. For instance, natural languages, music notation, genetic sequences of biopolymers, codes (code tables presenting interrelation of signs). In music notations, written on a one line staff (“string staff”), the notes, keys, alliteration signs, volume and tempo indications are the signs. In genetic structures, triplets are the signs-words. As of today, sign systems of taste and smell exist only as natural systems (like specimens, kind of a zoo). As for the sense of touch, there is the tactile Braille code composed of bumps and dots. Semiotics [1], which consists of three tags (semantics, syntactics and pragmatics), is the hub of all sign systems. Language text example: Set is an object formed by a set of objects. Polynomial is a set of object-monomials formed by a set of object-factors.                            (1)Turning text into a mathematical object requires correct coordinatization. The example text can be lemmatized (if morphological forms are important, lemmatization is optional) or brought to a normal form: nominative case, singular for nouns; nominative, singular, masculine for adjectives; verb in imperfect infinitive for verbs, participles and gerunds.    (set)1,1 (to be)2,2 (object)3,3 (form)4,4 (set)5,1 (object)6,3 (dot)7,7 (polynomial)8,8 (to be)9,2 (set)10,1 (object)11,3 (monomial)12,12 (form)13,4 (set)14,1 (object)15,3 (factor)16.16 (dot)17,7  (2)(2) is an example of correct coordinatization. Each word (sign) of the text acquires two indices (coordinates of the word). The first coordinate is the unique word number in the text. The second word coordinate is not as simple: it coincides with the first coordinate when the word appears in the text for the first time. You can see this, for example, in the first four words (2). The fifth word “set” has already been used in the text: (set)1,1. The word reoccurs in spot number five of the text (first coordinate). It first appeared in spot #1 of the text, then it reoccurs in spot #5. Therefore, in (2) this word-sign can be found with indices (coordinates) 5,1: (set)5,1. Thus, the second index (coordinate) is the number of the word that appears in the text for the first time. All words that appear in the text for the first time have two same numbers in the coordinates. The first coordinate is unique, while the second can repeat itself. According to their first coordinates, the fifth and sixth words in (2) have already appeared in the text under numbers 1 and 3. That is why there are no words like (...)5,5, (...)6,6 in the text, but the indexed words (set)5,1 and (object)6,3.Words with the same coordinates comprise what is called the text dictionary. We cannot call them an “alphabet” (the scope of the concept, i.e. the number of classes or sets of objects designated, is smaller), because there is no contextual dependence of signs in alphabets. And the most interesting sign sequences are those with contextual dependence and homonymous signs (same signs, different contextual meaning). For instance, any natural language and music is meaningless without the contexts of words and notes. The Russian sign-word “êîñà” has four meanings (“plait”, “sand bar”, “scythe”, “cord”). The intonment and interpretation of a piece of music depends on the previous pieces. Wandering polysemantic chords and functional inversions are the foundation of atonal music.Dictionary is the original text with repetitions removed. Text is a sign sequence with at least one repetition. Of course, short fragments of text may not have any repetitions at all, but the words used in them are used in a certain sense (context), which can be indicated by reference to an explanatory dictionary or another text. Then the second coordinate in (2) can be considered the word number in the dictionary. Text (2) dictionary:(set)1,1 (to be)2,2 (object)3,3 (form)4,4 (dot)7,7 (polynomial)8,8 (monomial)12,12 (factor)16.16  (3)After the coordinatization (1) 